Discipline - Addiction Medicine

A. Background knowledge

B. Clinical skills

C. Management

D. Public Health
A. Background knowledge

    Describe the motivation for drug use (aetiology), the patterns of use in the community (epidemiology), mechanisms of action (pharmacology) and the role of drugs in society (social context).
    Explain the actions (pharmacodynamics) and interactions of the common drugs listed above, and the role of route of administration and half-life (pharmacokinetics) in influencing liability to abuse and dependence.

    Describe features of the common intoxication and withdrawal states associated with the drugs listed below:
        nicotine
        alcohol
        prescription medications (opioids, sedatives and analgesics)
        illicit drugs (cannabis, opioids, psychostimulants)
    Describe the medical and psychiatric sequelae of alcohol and drug dependence and misuse.
    Discuss the public health consequences of alcohol, tobacco and illicit drug use (mortality, burden of disease, social harms).
    Demonstrate an understanding of the principles of harm reduction versus abstention as goals for managing substance abuse in individual patients and societies.

B. Clinical skills

    Assess patients and formulate a diagnosis by:
        taking a drug use history
        taking a psychosocial history
        performing an appropriate physical examination
        performing mental state examination
        selecting appropriate diagnostic tests and interpreting their results
        diagnose intoxication and withdrawal states
        diagnose substance use disorders (i.e. abuse and dependence syndromes).

C. Management

    Provide a summary of drug-related harm to an individual patient.
    Demonstrate a non-judgemental attitude when interviewing people with drug problems, and be able to establish and maintain a therapeutic relationship.
    Describe the main features of clinical risk assessment and risk management (e.g. self harm or suicide, driving safely, child protection, domestic violence).

    Negotiate a management plan for substance abuse disorders (including pharmacotherapy where relevant) that is appropriate to the diagnosis, patient characteristics, levels of motivation for change, and family and social supports.
    Apply the principles of brief intervention to patients with problem drug use.
    Explain the principles of management of drug overdose and intoxication.
    Explain principles of management of drug withdrawal syndromes.
    Understand the contribution of addictive substances to the poor health of indigenous populations, and the treatment strategies that are specific to these populations.

D. Public Health

    List and briefly describe responsible prescribing practices to prevent the development of drug problems.
    Outline, and understand the principles of the main public health strategies for reducing drug-related harm in the community.