Discipline - Critical Care

A. Other

    A. BACKGROUND

    Recall the anatomy of the nasal and oral cavities, the pharynx, larynx and trachea

    B. COMMUNICATION

    1. Communicate compassionately and effectively with patients and families with regard to:

    (a) anxieties and concerns about the risks and benefits of general anaesthesia

    (b) the management of pain during and after surgery ( local, regional and general)

    2. Recognise their limitations and mobilise experienced staff when necessary

    C. PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION
        Describe how to evaluate and optimally prepare a patient for surgery with regard to:

    (a) the role of the preanaesthetic/preoperative clinic in elective surgery
    (b) determining relevant preoperative tests and consultations with other specialists, according to patient and surgical risk factors i.e. pre-morbidities, medications and type of surgery
    (c) the effects of patients’ premorbidities and pre-operative medications on anaesthesia, surgery and the peri-operative period
    (d) fasting guidelines
    (e) informed consent

    D. GENERAL ANAESTHESIA

    1. Define what is meant by the terms - induction, maintenance and recovery - as they apply to the three stages of general anaesthesia, and list the drugs commonly used in each stage

    2. Outline the principles of airway management in the unconscious patient

    3. Relate the readings from commonly used monitors to the unconscious patient’s likely physiological status:

    (a) cardiovascular - ECG, blood pressure, heart rate
    (b) respiratory - pulse oximeter, capnography
    (c) temperature

    4. Explain the importance of correct positioning of unconscious patients especially during prolonged surgery

    5. Describe routine measures for deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis

    E. INTRAOPERATIVE FLUID THERAPY
        Understand the principles of intraoperative fluid therapy (for both fluid maintenance and replacing fluid loss) and the reasons for choosing either crystalline or colloid fluids
        Describe the indications for and complications of blood transfusion

    F. POST-OPERATIVE CARE
        Prescribe adequate and appropriate post operative analgesia and anti-emetic medication
        Outline the principles of post-operative fluid therapy

    G. LOCAL AND REGIONAL ANAESTHESIA
        Outline the role of local or regional anaesthesia for surgical procedures and post-operative analgesia
        Describe briefly the pharmacology and adverse effects of local anaesthetic drugs

    H. OXYGEN THERAPY
        Recognise the indications for oxygen therapy
        Describe the clinical indications for choosing to administer oxygen via nasal prongs, simple mask, venturi mask, and mask with a rebreathing bag
        Monitor a patient in respiratory failure clinically, with pulse oximetry and by measurement of arterial blood gases

    I. SKILLS
        Perform a pre-transfusion check
        Perform venepuncture and intravenous cannulation
        Set up a fluid giving set
        Maintain a patent airway in an unconscious but not intubated patient
        Ventilate using a bag and mask
        Infiltrate local anaesthetic for a simple localised procedures
        Observe a central venous cannulation if possible
    A. THE UNDIFFERENTIATED PATIENT IN THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT (ED)
        Demonstrate a systematic approach to the clinical assessment of the undifferentiated patient presenting to the emergency department
        Discuss the initial management of the undifferentiated patient using the DR ABCDE approach
        Describe the time-line for perform resuscitation, secondary care and tertiary care in the ongoing delivery of care to the undifferentiated patient in the emergency department
        Discuss the importance of repeated and timely reassessment of the undifferentiated patient in the emergency department
        Demonstrate the principles of essential life support for a collapsed/arrested patient in the emergency department - BLS/ALS
    B. THE PATIENT PRESENTING TO THE ED WITH SHORTNESS OF BREATH
        Demonstrate a systematic approach to the clinical assessment of patients presenting to the emergency department with SOB
        List the five most common life-threatening causes of SOB presenting to the emergency department
        Identify the symptoms and signs for patients presenting to the emergency department with life-threatening causes of SOB
        Describe the common diagnostic tools used in the emergency department to help differentiate between the common life-threatening causes of shortness of breath
        Discuss the initial management of patients presenting to the emergency department with SOB

    C. THE PATIENT PRESENTING TO THE ED WITH CHEST PAIN
        Demonstrate a systematic approach to the clinical assessment of patients presenting to the emergency department with chest pain
        List the five most common life-threatening causes of chest pain presenting to the emergency department
        Identify the symptoms and signs of for patients presenting to the emergency department with life-threatening causes of chest pain
        Describe the common diagnostic tools used in the emergency department to help differentiate between the common life-threatening causes of chest pain
        Discuss the initial management of patients presenting to the emergency department with chest pain

    D. THE PATIENT PRESENTING TO THE ED WITH ABDOMINAL PAIN
        Demonstrate a systematic approach to the clinical assessment of patients presenting to the emergency department with abdominal pain
        List the five most common life-threatening causes of abdominal pain presenting to the emergency department
        Identify the symptoms and signs for patients presenting to the emergency department with life-threatening causes of abdominal pain
        Describe the common diagnostic tools used in the emergency department to help differentiate between the common life-threatening causes of abdominal pain
        Discuss the initial management of patients presenting to the emergency department with abdominal pain

    E. THE PATIENT PRESENTING TO THE ED WITH AN ALTERED LEVEL OF CONSCIOUSNESS (ALOC)
        Demonstrate a systematic approach to the clinical assessment for patients presenting to the emergency department with an aLOC
        List the five most common causes of life-threatening aLOC presenting to the emergency department
        Identify the symptoms and signs for patients presenting to the emergency department with a life-threatening cause of an aLOC
        Describe the common diagnostic tools used in the emergency department to help differentiate between the common life-threatening causes of an aLOC
        Discuss the initial management patients presenting to the emergency department with an aLOC
        Discuss the recognition and initial management of common drug overdoses in the emergency department

    F. THE PATIENT PRESENTING TO THE ED WITH ACUTE TRAUMA
        Differentiate between the causes of shock into the following functional clinical groups: Hypovolemic, Cardiogenic, Distributive, Neurogenic and Obstructive
        Demonstrates a systematic approach to the clinical assessment of patients presenting with acute trauma to the emergency department within the framework of the primary and secondary survey
        List seven life threatening conditions that may be found by the primary survey
        Identify the symptoms and signs of life threatening conditions that may be found by the primary survey and the time-frame for their identification.
        Discuss the initial management of patients presenting with serious trauma in the emergency department
        Apply the general principles of fluid balance management in hypovolaemic shock due to blood loss
        Discuss the role of the tertiary survey in acute trauma care in the emergency department

    A. GENERAL OBJECTIVES
        Understand the role of the intensive care unit in:

    (a) the evaluation and resuscitation of critically ill patients;
    (b) the evaluation and management of patients with vital organ and system failures

    B. SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES

    1. Recognise the acutely deteriorating patient

    2. Understand the physiological and clinical implications of derangements of :
    (a) blood pressure
    (b) gas exchange
    (c) urine output
    (d) heart rate and rhythm
    (e) respiratory rate

    3. List and understand the principles of the early management of the acutely deteriorating patient

    4. Integrate data from multiple sources ( e.g. history, blood biochemistry, radiological, tissue histology etc) with the bedside examination of the critically ill patient

    5. Describe the multi-professional team approach to the care of the patient with multiorgan failure in the intensive care unit

    6. Discuss the principles of management of the patient and relatives in a situation where further active therapy is deemed futile

    A. THE PATIENT PRESENTING WITH MULTITRAUMA
        Describe the priorities and a sequential and logical approach to the assessment, stabilization and management of a patient involved in trauma including initial resuscitation, primary and secondary survey, and cervical spine stabilization
        Describe the indications and precautions for the use of initial investigations including cervical spine xray, mobile chest xray, peritoneal lavage, and CT trauma scanning
        Identify the potential injuries which can arise from various mechanisms of trauma including deceleration injuries, steering wheel injury, seat belt injury, motor bike accidents, and pedestrian accidents
        Identify the anatomical structures at risk in stab injuries, including stabbing in left mid axillary line in the 10th intercostal space, epigastric, left flank, left lower abdominal quadrant anteriorly, and interscapular.

    B. WOUND MANAGEMENT
        Define and describe the principles of management of clean wounds and contaminated wounds
        Describe the clinical and histological basis of wound healing and list the systemic and local factors which may delay healing.
        Recognise the presence of the following in a post operative surgical wound: dehiscence, infection, delayed healing, and haematoma
        Advise a patient with a laceration regarding the indications, contraindications and side effects of tetanus immunisation, antibiotics, and the need for suturing

    C. THE PATIENT PRESENTING WITH A FRACTURE OR DISLOCATION
        Define the following terms: closed fracture, compound fracture, comminuted fracture, pathological fracture, greenstick fracture, intra-articular fracture.
        Describe the principles of fracture reduction, joint immobilisation and healing for the following fractures: Colles fracture, scaphoid fracture, supracondylar fracture of the arm, humerus fracture, collar bone fracture, fractured neck of femur, tibial fracture, ankle fracture.
        Describe the mechanism and management (immediate and delayed) of sports injuries including strains, sprains, ruptures, cruciate injuries and ankle ligament injuries.
        Describe the mechanism, complications and management of dislocations of the following: shoulder, hip, patella, ankle, finger

    D. THE PATIENT PRESENTING WITH GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING
        Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with haematemesis and/or melaena with regard to the underlying anatomical structures and processes leading to gastrointestinal bleeding
        Describe the principles of resuscitation and indications for blood transfusion in a patient with haematemesis and melaena.
        Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with haematemesis and melaena in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.
        Outline the pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of haematemesis and melaena including oesophageal carcinoma, reflux oesophagitis, carcinoma of the stomach, gastritis and gastric erosions, peptic ulcer disease, duodenal carcinoma, and hereditary telangiestasia

    E. THE PATIENT PRESENTING UNCONSCIOUS OR IN AN ACUTE CONFUSIONAL STATE
        Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with confusion or paralysis with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction
        Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with confusion or paralysis in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.
        Outline the, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of confusion including transient ischaemic attacks, stroke, brain tumours, chronic subdural haematoma and vertebrobasilar insufficiency.
        Describe the principles of acute resuscitation, investigation and management of a patient presenting unconscious following major head trauma.

    F. THE PATIENT PRESENTING FOLLOWING A BURN INJURY
        Generate a list of possible forms or causes of burns, including the common mechanisms of injury.
        Outline the differences in the presentation and pathology of thermal burns, chemical burns and electrical burns.
        Describe and define the rule of 9s in relation to the assessment of major burns.
        Describe the immediate, short term and long term management and sequelae of burns.
