Discipline - Oncology

A. Clinical diagnosis

B. Emergencies

C. Global objectives

D. Management

E. Screening
A. Clinical diagnosis

    Diagnosis of common tumours
    With reference to the clinical history, physical examination and investigations, describe the typical
    clinical presentations and methods for diagnosing:
    (a) colorectal cancer
    (b) breast cancer
    (c) prostate cancer
    (d) melanoma
    (e) lung cancer.
     

    Clinical presentations  
    The diagnosis of malignancy is also covered in the core curricula for the individual body systems and in
    the study of diagnostic imaging. 

    Take a relevant clinical history, competently carry out a physical examination, and arrange
    appropriate referral for patients who present with one or more of the following:

    i. Head and neck symptoms, e.g. a lump in the neck, a suspicious lesion in the mouth or oropharynx, persistent hoarseness of the voice.

    ii. Breast symptoms, e.g. a breast lump, abnormal discharge from the nipple.

    iii. Gastro-intestinal symptoms, e.g. dysphagia, an abdominal mass, symptoms suggestive of bowel obstruction, rectal bleeding.

    iv. Neurological symptoms, e.g. a change in pattern of headaches, an initial seizure, visual disturbance, symptoms of spinal cord compression.

    v. Respiratory tract symptoms, e.g. persistent cough and/or haemoptysis.

    vi. Urogenital symptoms, e.g. haematuria, symptoms of urinary obstruction, postmenopausal vaginal bleeding, scrotal swelling.

    vii. Skin symptoms, e.g. a skin or mucosal lesion suggestive of a melanoma or non-melanomatous skin cancer.

    viii. Endocrine symptoms, e.g. nodular goitre, growth disturbance in a child, manifestations of endocrine hormone over-production.

    ix. General or systemic symptoms, e.g. unexplained fatiguability, unexplained weight loss, unexplained fracture, unexplained bruising.

    Assessment of tumour grade and stage

    For the cancers listed below, (a) list key features in the interpretation of pathology reports, (b) describe
    how the pathology findings are used in making treatment decisions and determining prognosis, and (c)
    summarise the principles of tumour staging:
    (a) colorectal cancer
    (b) breast cancer (including information on hormone receptors)
    (c) prostate cancer
    (d) melanoma
    (e) lung cancer
    (f) cancer of the cervix.
     

B. Emergencies

    Describe the clinical characteristics, diagnostic features, initial management and appropriate referral of
    cancer patients who present with the following acute conditions:
    (a) febrile neutropenia  
    (b) spinal cord compression  
    (c) mediastinal compression
    (d) bowel obstruction
    (e) urinary tract obstruction
    (f) hypercalcaemia
    (g) raised intracranial pressure  
    (h) serious acute side-effects of specific chemotherapeutic agents (e.g. cardiotoxic effects of
    doxorubicin)

C. Global objectives

    Care of patients with cancer
    (a) Be familiar with the spectrum of cancer care, encompassing screening, early detection, diagnosis,
    assessment (tumour grade and stage of disease), treatment (surgical, medical and radiation
    oncology and psychosocial support), rehabilitation, follow-up, management of recurrence, and
    palliative care.
    (b) Describe the key elements to be considered in communicating with and providing support to
    cancer patients and their families, making reference to  
    i. the stages in the spectrum of cancer care listed above,  
    ii. prognosis, and  
    iii. decision-making regarding treatment options.   
    (c) Outline the rationale for integrated multidisciplinary care of cancer patients, and list and outline the
    roles of the members of typical multidisciplinary teams.
    (d) Describe (to a patient) the modes of administration and the side-effects of the main classes of
    chemotherapeutic agents currently in use.
    (e) Describe (to a patient) the mode of administration and side-effects of external beam radiotherapy.
     

    Cancer and carcinogenesis
    (a) Summarise the overall contribution of cancer to morbidity and mortality in the Australian population.
    (b) Describe, in general terms, the macroscopic and microscopic pathological features that distinguish
    benign from malignant tumours.
    (c) Outline the genetic and cellular mechanisms of carcinogenesis.
    (d) Describe (to a patient) the nature of cancer as a chronic disease.
    (e) List the main modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors for the cancers that occur most frequently
    in Australia.  
     

D. Management

    Treatment of newly diagnosed cancers

    The list below refers to treatment following a new diagnosis of cancer (as distinct from treatment following the diagnosis of cancer recurrence).
    1. Principles
    (a) Outline the principles of integrated, multi-disciplinary management of a patient newly diagnosed with cancer, making specific reference to colorectal, breast, prostate and lung cancer and melanoma.

    2. Surgical oncology
    (a) Outline the role of surgery in the management of cancer, including diagnosis (biopsy), staging, curative resection, symptom palliation,with specific reference to colorectal, breast and prostate cancer and melanoma.

    3. Medical oncology
    (a) Outline the modes of action of the main classes of systematic therapeutic agents – cytotoxic, biological (immunological) and hormonal agents.
    (b) Outline the uses of chemotherapy as curative and adjuvant therapy.
    (c) Outline the main acute and chronic toxic effects of chemotherapeutic agents.

    4. Radiation oncology
    (a) Outline, in general terms, the mechanism of action in the treatment of cancer, concentrating on external beam radiotherapy.
    (b) Summarise the place of radiotherapy in cancer management, with specific reference to:  the types of malignancies that are sensitive to radiotherapy; curative versus palliative intent, organ preservation; local versus systemic control of disease; and combinations of radiotherapy with surgery and chemotherapy.

    5. Psychosocial support
    (a) Outline the types of information that patients and their families may need at the time of a diagnosis of cancer, and describe how members of the multi-disciplinary team can facilitate patient participation in decision-making.
    (b) Outline key aspects of communicating with a patient in the following situations:  breaking bad news; preparing for aversive procedures and therapies; discussing treatment options, and discussing follow-up.

    Rehabilitation

    Outline the objectives of a coordinated multi-disciplinary approach to the rehabilitation of patients following treatment for cancer, with reference to restoration of physical function, detection and treatment of depression and anxiety, and restoration of social and occupational roles.

    Recurrent Cancers

    Outline the principles of management of a patient with a recurrence of cancer, covering local and metastatic manifestations and making specific reference to colorectal, breast, prostate and lung cancer and melanoma

    Palliative Care

    1. Principles
    (a) Define ‘palliative care’ and ‘end-of-life care’ in the context of cancer, and describe the importance of a palliative approach to patients with a life-limiting illness.
    (b) Outline the factors to be considered in assessing the balance of benefit versus burden for disease- specific investigations, procedures and other treatments for patients with advanced cancer.
    (c) List triggers for the adoption of a supportive or palliative approach to care and, with respect to cancer, describe the types of patients who are appropriate for a palliative approach.
    (d) Summarise the roles of the various members of the multi-disciplinary palliative care team. 
    (e) Recognise the emotional challenges of caring for patients with life-limiting illnesses.

    2. Management of patients and their families
    (a) Describe the assessment of the physical, psychological, social and existential concerns and priorities of a patient with advanced cancer.
    (b) Describe the assessment and the principles of management of cancer patients with common physical symptoms of advanced disease, including pain, nausea, dyspnoea and constipation, with reference to pharmacological and non-pharmacological options.
    (c) Describe the principles of management of cancer patients with common psychological manifestations of advanced disease, including depression and anxiety.
    (d) Outline the importance of optimal symptom control and psychosocial and practical support for patients with advanced cancer and their carers.
    (e) Describe principles of comfort care for patients who are expected to die imminently.
    (f) Describe the assessment of the information needs of patients and their families about their illness and prognosis.

    3. Decision-making and ethics
    (a) Summarise the factors that influence decisions in the management of patients with advanced
    cancer, outline ethical issues that may arise in the decision-making process, and outline points to
    be considered in resolving ethical dilemmas.
    (b) Define ‘advance care planning’, and describe important components of and approaches for
    advance care planning discussions with patients.

    Follow-up

    Outline (to a patient) the rationale and arrangements for follow-up after treatment for colorectal, breast, prostate and lung cancer and melanoma, with reference to self-examination, follow-up procedures such as colonoscopy, follow-up imaging such as mammography, and the use of tumour markers such as prostate-specific antigen (PSA).

E. Screening

    Explain the interpretation of true and false positive, and true and false negative screening test results
    with regard to decision making on the results of a screening test.

    Describe (to a patient) the importance of, and procedures for, faecal occult blood testing,
    mammography screening and cervical cancer screening, including an explanation of the difference
    between a screening test and a diagnostic test.

    Describe (to a male patient) the value and limitations of prostate-specific antigen testing and digital
    rectal examination in early detection of prostate cancer.

    Describe (to a female patient) the value of, and method for, breast self-examination.

    Carry out and interpret the result of a Pap test.

    Carry out a digital rectal examination to detect abnormalities of the prostate gland.
     

    Interpret the results of, and arrange appropriate referral and follow up for patients with equivocal or
    positive results.

    Detect lesions that have a high probability of being a melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma or basal cell
    carcinoma (of the skin, eye, oral mucosa and external genital mucosa), and appropriately refer patients
    with these lesions for further management.

    Describe the rationale for population-based screening and early detection of cancers such as
    colorectal, breast and cervical cancer, and outline the screening methods used. 