Discipline - Dermatology

A. Background knowledge

B. Drugs and therapies

C. Emergencies

D. Global objectives

E. History taking

F. Investigations

G. Management

H. Other common skin conditions

I. Physical examination

J. Rashes

K. Skin cancer

L. Skin infections

M. Skin lesions

N. Skin signs of systemic disease
A. Background knowledge

    Describe the structure of normal skin
    Describe the function of normal skin - thermoregulation, protective, sensory, immunological and psychosocial

    Describe the different wavebands within the solar spectrum, the adverse and beneficial effects of ultraviolet radiation on the skin, the skin's main defence mechanisms against UV radiation, and how sunscreens work and their limitations.

B. Drugs and therapies

    Describe the indications, benefits and potential side effects of the following topical treatments:

        topical steroids

        sunscreens

        topical agents under occlusion including wet dressings

        tar creams

        calcipotriol

        topical retinoids

        topical antibiotics
    List one example each of a mild, moderate and potent topical corticosteroid available in Australia

    Communicate effectively to a patient or carer how to use general skin care measures and emollients, showing knowledge of the quantity required to cover different surface areas, and the appropriate base (lotion, cream or ointment) to treat the particular skin condition

    Describe the indications, benefits, contraindications and main potential side effects of common oral treatments in dermatology:

        oral steroids

        antihistamines

        tetracyclines

        oral retinoids

        acyclovir

C. Emergencies

    Recognise and appropriately triage the following emergency dermatological presentations:
        angioedema and anaphylaxis
        acute meningococcaemia
        eczema herpeticum
        staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
        kawasaki’s disease
        pustular psoriasis
        severe drug reactions such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis and drug hypersensitivity syndrome

D. Global objectives

    Understand basic skin structure and function

    Describe, using appropriate terminology, the morphology and distribution of skin lesions

    Assess a person’s risk for common skin conditions and advise them on effective prevention strategies

    Diagnose and manage common non-malignant skin conditions

    Diagnose, appropriately triage, and know the range of treatment options for skin cancers

    Recognise and arrange appropriate referral for uncommon but dangerous skin conditions

    Confidently prescribe topical treatments including emollients and steroids and understand the benefits and potential side effects of these treatments

    Recognise the psychosocial impact of skin diseases

E. History taking

    Take a comprehensive dermatological history including risk factors for common skin conditions
    Explore patients’ concerns and expectations about their disease and treatment
    Understand that skin disease (especially chronic skin disease) can have significant psychosocial and financial impacts
    Use the correct terminology to describe findings in skin, mucosal surfaces, hair and nails
    Assess a person’s cutaneous sun sensitivity
    Explain to patients the role of the sun in skin cancer, photo-ageing and other skin conditions and advise strategies to prevent skin cancer
    Write a discharge letter to a general practitioner giving clear advice about ongoing skin management
    Write an inpatient consultation request and an outpatient referral to a dermatologist explaining the reasons for referral and level of urgency

F. Investigations

    Demonstrate the correct technique for taking:

        skin scrapings for fungal microscopy and culture

        skin scrapings to diagnose scabies

        a swab for suspected bacterial infection

        a viral swab
    State the indications for skin biopsy
    Describe the principles of local anaesthesia and wound care following skin biopsy
    State the possible complications of skin biopsy
    Interpret a skin biopsy histopathology report for melanoma, basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma

G. Management

    Examine for undiagnosed and untreated skin conditions in inpatients (especially in the elderly and immunocompromised)
    Initiate appropriate treatment (e.g. scabies, dry skin, infection) or triage appropriately (suspected skin malignancy or sign of systemic disease)

H. Other common skin conditions

    Recognise and discuss basic management options for:
        acne
        rosacea
        pruritus
        pityriasis Rosea
        alopecia
        changes in pigmentation

I. Physical examination

    Examine the skin systematically from head to toes: skin, hair, nails, mucous membranes and skin folds (axillae, groin and between digits)
    Examine and identify common benign and malignant skin lesions
    Examine for clinically significant lymphadenopathy

J. Rashes

    Scaly rashes:
    Describe the clinical features, triggers and management of atopic eczema

    Scaly rashes:
    Recognise the varied clinical presentations of psoriasis and outline the principles of management.

    Scaly rashes:
    Recognise the clinical presentation of forms of endogenous dermatitis (including seborrhoeic dermatitis, contact dermatitis, asteatotic eczema, discoid eczema, perioral dermatitis, dyshidrotic eczema and venous stasis dermatitis).

    Scaly rashes:
    Devise a management plan for treating dermatitis

    Scaly rashes:
    Be aware that scaly rashes that do not respond to treatment may be malignant and therefore require referral to a specialist

    Allergic rashes:
    Describe the immunological abnormalities that result in allergic reactions involving skin

    Allergic rashes:
    Describe the mechanism of Type I and Type IV allergic reaction

    Allergic rashes:
    Relate different allergic reactions to their characteristic cutaneous reaction patterns and underlying mechanisms.

    Allergic rashes:
    Describe and recognise
        urticaria and angioedema
        allergic contact dermatitis
        common cutaneous drug reactions

    Allergic rashes:
    List the common allergens that cause cutaneous allergic reactions.

    Allergic rashes:
    Outline the management of anaphylaxis and allergic reactions.

K. Skin cancer

    Outline an approach to differentiating melanoma from other non-malignant pigmented naevi (melanocytic, junctional, compound, dermal and atypical naevi)

    Suspect the following on clinical grounds:

        melanoma

        squamous cell carcinoma

        Bowen’s disease (SCC in situ)

        Basal Cell Carcinoma (superficial, nodular, infiltrating/morphemic, pigmented)

        actinic (solar) keratosis
    State the lifetime risk of developing melanoma, BCC and SCC in Australia
    Suspect malignancy in non-healing skin lesions
    List the risk factors for melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancers
    Describe the clinical course and prognosis of the above conditions
    Describe the range of treatments for the above including excision, cryotherapy and topical treatments
    Describe available measures and understand the evidence for and role of regular skin screening in skin cancer risk reduction

L. Skin infections

    Recognise and describe the clinical presentation of skin rashes or eruptions caused by:
        bacteria
            staph Aureus - impetigo, folliculitis, boils, cellulitis
            neisseria Meningitidis - meningococcal infection
            strep Pyogenes - impetigo, cellulitis
            corynebacterium Minutissimum - erythrasma.

    Recognise and describe the clinical presentation of skin rashes or eruptions caused by:
        viruses
            herpes simplex
            varicella - chicken pox
            varicella zoster - shingles
            hyperproliferative lesions - warts and molluscum contagiosum
        fungi and yeast - including Candida Albicans, Pityriasis Versicolor and all forms of tinea (skin, scalp, nails)
        insects - scabies, pediculosis (lice)
    Define the term ‘Staphylococcal Carrier State'
    Describe the investigation (if indicated) and management of:

        bacterial skin rashes (name appropriate antibiotics)

        herpes simplex, shingles, warts and molluscum contagiosum

        cutaneous fungal and yeast infections

        scabies (differentiate between approaches in urban and rural communities)

        pediculosis (lice)

    Contrast the susceptibility of indigenous communities to scabies and S. Pyogenes with that of non-indigenous communities

M. Skin lesions

    Recognise the following benign skin lesions:

        seborrhoeic keratosis

        skin tags

        angioma

        solar lentigo

        dermatofibroma

        epidermoid cyst

N. Skin signs of systemic disease

    Recognise the skin signs of:
        internal malignancy (including pruritus, acanthosis nigrans, dermatomyositis)
        HIV infection
        Systemic Lupus Erythematosis
        autoimmune bullous disorders (bullous pemphigoid, pemphigus)
        vasculitis
        thyroid disease
