Discipline - General Practice

A. Communication skills

B. Applied knowledge and skills

C. Population medicine

D. Personal and Professional Development (PPD)

E. Organisational and legal dimensions of practice

F. Evidence Based Medicine (EBM)

G. General practice priority area cases

H. General practice common and important conditions

I. Rehabiliation medicine

J. Sexual health medicine

K. Skin cancer

L. Indigenous health

M. Rural health
A. Communication skills

    Domain 1: Communication Skills and the Patient-Doctor Relationship
        Communicate skilfully with patients and their significant others, exhibiting empathy, establishing rapport, engendering confidence and trust, and valuing patient autonomy, privacy and confidentiality, and using communication styles appropriate for the context (social and cultural) of the consultation.
        Describe a range of strategies for dealing with challenging or vulnerable patients especially rural and remote Australians, Indigenous Australians, people from Culturally and Linguistically Diverse (CALD) backgrounds, and refugees.
        Adopt appropriate verbal and non-verbal communication styles, taking into consideration a patient’s age, emotional state, socio-political, economic, work, spiritual and cultural background and needs and their relationships with family and significant others in relation to their health.
        Recognise opportunities for health promotion and education and respond appropriately to increase the patient's capacity for self care;
        Confirm the patient's understanding of the problem, management, advice and follow- up (safety netting).
        Recognise the impact of the doctor’s personal and professional culture

B. Applied knowledge and skills

    Domain 2: Applied Clinical Knowledge and Skills for Primary care practice
        Gather a focussed patient history, including the nature of the patient’s concerns, generating and testing clinical hypotheses, based on a sound knowledge of the basic, social and clinical sciences.
        Perform an appropriate physical examination, testing and refining diagnostic hypotheses
        Synthesise history and examination findings to develop differential diagnoses and problem list and critically uses investigations to refine the working diagnosis and work towards a comprehensive holistic management plan
        Make timely, informed and rational decisions (including appropriate and timely referral) in circumstances of uncertainty where there is a possibility of serious illness
        Show an understanding of the principles of managing chronic illness, with an emphasis on maintaining function and independence, minimising impact on activities of daily living and maximising patient’s understanding and involvement in their care
        Show an understanding of the management of institutionalised patients eg in an aged care facility.
        Show an awareness of the management of dying, death and bereavement (including the provision of palliative care) in the community setting
        Maintain and perform the practical procedures ( including resuscitation skills) utilised in primary and community settings
        Show an understanding of the principles of safe and rational prescribing.

C. Population medicine

    Domain 3: Population Health and the Context of General Practice
        Include appropriate evidence-based disease prevention and patient education strategies in the management of patients in general practice
        Demonstrate the principles of effective community-based prevention and education strategies in clinical general practice cases.
        Describe the demography and health problems of a range of urban, rural and global communities.
        Analyse how socioeconomic, cultural, environmental, occupational and spiritual factors impact on health
        Defines and describes the particular health needs of people living in vulnerable sub-communities
        Describe the key components of the Australian health system with particular reference to the primary care interface.
        Compares and discusses differences in health service delivery between different community settings

D. Personal and Professional Development (PPD)

    Domain 4 : Professional and Ethical Role
        Demonstrate a sense of the responsibility required for the optimal care,recognising and respecting patient-doctor boundaries, and your own limitations, and undertaking advocacy as appropriate
        Understand the principles of “open disclosure” where errors in care have been made.
        Understand the factors likely to lead to complaints
        Demonstrate the capacity for self-awareness, reflection and self appraisal, and take responsibility for professional development, demonstrating the skills of and commitment to lifelong learning
        Understand the personal health risks of medical practice – for example, fatigue, stress, and occupational hazards
        Demonstrate working effectively and cooperatively as a member of a primary or community care team

E. Organisational and legal dimensions of practice

    Domain 5 : Organisational and Legal Dimensions of practice
        Demonstrate personal, organisational and time management skills in practice;
        Observe and describe the roles & responsibilities of primary and community care team members
        Make accurate and legible recordings of consultations and referrals, ensuring continuity of care by other colleagues involved in the patient’s care
        Understand issues of equity of access to competent, compassionate healthcare including for the physically or cognitively disabled, and the geographically and financially disadvantaged
        Be aware of the principles of managing information and electronic data systems relating to:
            clinical standards, guidelines and protocols;
            prescribing information
            medical records
            communication and transfer of patient-related information;
            screening, recall and related systems
            access and confidentiality
        Demonstrate the application of patient safety and medico-legal principles in the context of: certification, confidentiality, prescribing, informed consent, duty of care, and avoiding litigation

F. Evidence Based Medicine (EBM)

    Demonstrate the ability to identify and evaluate the best available medical evidence for use in clinical decision making e.g. search engines, pre-appraised evidence, clinical pathways, clinical guidelines, and practice protocols

G. General practice priority area cases

    The following list of core clinical problems is based on the Federal Governments national priority list for chronic disease prevention and management in primary care.

    Student clinical topic presentations cover much of this material. Students should know the aetiology, modes of presentation and overviews of patient management of core clinical problems in the following areas

    Priority Areas Examples of student led clinical topic presentations
        Arthritis and musculoskeletal conditions e.g. osteoarthritis, osteoporosis, inflammatory arthritidis
        Asthma - Atopic asthma, Chronic Obstructive Airways Disease
        Cancer Control Managing cancer as a chronic illness eg breast, lung, bowel and prostate.
        Cardiovascular Health - Hypertension, prevention of cardio and cerebrovascular disease
        Diabetes Mellitus - Diabetic management planning, risk assessment and prevention
        Injury Prevention and Control - Falls prevention
        Mental Health Dementia, Anxiety Disorders, Depression,
        Obesity - Lifestyle interventions, pharmaceutical management and prevention

H. General practice common and important conditions

    This list is based on national data collection of common presenting problems to general practices across Australia, commonly referred to as the Beach Data. However, we have included less common but important conditions. Students should be able to perform an accurate and focused history, examination, differential and initial management plan for the common or rare but important primary care presenting problems. Where appropriate, clinical assessment may require detailed occupational or drug and alcohol histories. These presenting problems include:
        Cough
        Shortness of breath
        Fever
        Vomiting/Diarrhoea
        Pain ( head, neck, back, chest, abdominal, joints, throat, eye, ear)
        Tiredness/fatigue
        Depression/Anxiety
        Dizziness
        Weight loss
        Disturbance of urinary, bowel and menstrual patterns
        Skin rash/lesion including skin cancers
        Sexual Health

I. Rehabiliation medicine

    See the Core Curriculum for Rehabilitation Medicine and also relevant Priority Areas Cases and Common and/or important problems.

J. Sexual health medicine

    See the relevant Priority Areas Cases and Common and/or important problems.

K. Skin cancer

    See the Core Curriculum for Dermatology. Please note some of the Dermatology Core Curriculum is assessed in the surgery block.

L. Indigenous health

    See the Core Curriculum for Indigenous Health.

M. Rural health

    See relevant Priority Areas Cases and Common and/or important problems