Discipline - Geriatric Medicine

A. Drugs and therapeutics

B. Clinical diagnosis

C. Management

D. Clinical presentations
A. Drugs and therapeutics

    Identify medications, including anticholinergic, psychoactive, anticoagulant, analgesic, hypoglycaemic, and cardiovascular drugs that should be avoided or used with caution in older adults and explain the potential problems associated with each.

    Document a patient’s complete medication list, including prescribed, complementary and alternative medicines, and over-the-counter medications, and for each medication provide the dose, frequency, indication, benefit, side effects, and an assessment of adherence.

    Identify potential hazards in a patient’s medication list and suggest improvements
    Explain the impact of old age and frailty on pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in old age.
    Apply this knowledge to drug and dose selection when prescribing for older people.

B. Clinical diagnosis

    Cognitive and Behavioral Disorders

    Define and distinguish among the clinical presentations of delirium, dementia, and depression.

    Formulate a differential diagnosis and implement initial evaluation in a patient who exhibits dementia, delirium, or depression.

    In an older patient with delirium, articulate a diagnostic work-up to determine the possible causes.

    Perform and interpret a cognitive assessment in older patients for whom there are concerns regarding memory or function.

    Articulate some of the strategies that can be used to evaluate and non-pharmacologically manage agitated demented or delirious patients.

    Falls, Balance, Gait Disorders

    In a patient who has fallen, formulate a differential diagnosis and construct an evaluation/management plan that addresses the multiple aetiologies identified by history, physical examination and functional assessment

C. Management

    Self-care capacity

    Assess and describe baseline and current functional abilities (instrumental activities of daily living, activities of daily living, and special senses) in an older patient by collecting historical data from multiple sources and performing a confirmatory physical examination.

    Develop a preliminary management plan for patients presenting with functional deficits, including adaptive interventions and involvement of interdisciplinary team members from appropriate disciplines, such as social work, nursing, rehabilitation, nutrition, and pharmacy.

    Explain the importance of Identifying and assessing safety risks in the home environment, and understand the rationale for recommendations to mitigate these.

    Health Care Planning

    Accurately identify clinical situations where life expectancy, functional status, patient preference or goals of care should override standard recommendations for treatment in older adults.

    Palliative Care

    Assess and provide a management plan for pain and key non-pain symptoms in an older patient at the end of life.

    Acute Hospital Care of Older People

    Identify potential hazards of hospitalization for all older adult patients (including immobility, delirium, medication side effects, malnutrition, pressure ulcers, procedures, peri- and post-operative periods, and hospital acquired infections) and identify potential prevention strategies.

    Establish the mental competency of older patients in order to determine their capacity to consent.

    Explain the risks, indications, alternatives, and contraindications for indwelling (Foley) catheter use in the older adult patient.

    Communicate the key components of a safe discharge plan (e.g., accurate medication list, plan for follow-up), including comparing/contrasting potential sites for discharge.

    Conduct a surveillance examination of areas of the skin at high risk for pressure ulcers and describe existing ulcers.

D. Clinical presentations

    Identify at least 3 physiologic changes of aging for each organ system and their impact on the patient, including their contribution to homeostasis (the age-related narrowing of homeostatic reserve mechanisms).

    Generate a differential diagnosis based on recognition of the common syndromes (‘Geriatric Giants’) that are associated with acute illness in frail older people – delirium, falls, sepsis, pain, breathlessness, incontinence, immobility, stroke and iatrogeneis (medication side-effects)