Discipline - Haematology

A. Acute conditions

B. Background knowledge

C. Chronic conditions

D. Common and/or important conditions

E. Communication

F. Drugs and therapies

G. Emergencies

H. History taking

I. Investigations

J. Physical examination

K. Physiology

L. Transfusion medicine
A. Acute conditions

    For acute presentations of the following conditions:
        List the key diagnostic features you would expect to obtain from history and physical examination
        Interpret results from the automated blood cell counter, peripheral blood film and bone marrow biopsy that accompany these diseases
        Describe the principles of management and prognosis
            autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
            microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia
            paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria
            glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
            immune thrombocytopenia purpura
            deep vein thrombosis/ pulmonary embolism
            disseminated intravascular coagulation
            acute myeloid and lymphoblastic leukaemia
            hypercalcaemia associated with multiple myeloma
            complications of transfusion of red blood cells and other blood components including haemolytic, febrile, infectious and circulatory complications

B. Background knowledge

    Identify the following cells on the peripheral blood film: erythrocyte, neutrophil, eosinophil, basophil, monocyte, platelet

C. Chronic conditions

    For the following chronic haematological diseases:
        list the key diagnostic features you would expect to obtain from history and physical examination
        interpret results from the automated blood cell counter, peripheral blood film and bone marrow biopsy that accompany these diseases
        describe the principles of management and prognosis
            anaemia due to deficiencies of iron, vitamin B12 and folic acid
            anaemia of chronic disease
            thalassaemia syndromes
            haemophilia A
            haemophilia B
            von Willebrands disease
            chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
            chronic myeloid leukaemia
            non Hodgkins lymphoma
            Hodgkins lymphoma
            multiple myeloma
            myeloproliferative disorders (polycythaemia rubra vera, myelofibrosis and essential thrombocythaemia).

D. Common and/or important conditions

    Describe the key features on history and physical examination that would cause you to suspect a diagnosis of:
        anaemia and specific clinical features of iron, B12 or folate deficiencies
        thalassaemia syndromes
        haemolytic anaemia
        immune thrombocytopenia purpura
        neutropenia (autoimmune disease, primary marrow disorder, drug induced)
        deep vein thrombosis/ pulmonary embolism
        inherited disorders of coagulation, haemophilia A and B and von Willebrands disease
        acute leukaemia
        chronic leukaemia
        non-Hodgkins and Hodgkins lymphoma
        multiple myeloma
        non-leukaemic myeloproliferative disorders (polycythaemia rubra vera, myelofibrosis and essential thrombocythaemia)
        secondary and relative polycythaemia

E. Communication

        Provide basic genetic counselling to patients with inherited haematological disorders such as thalassaemia and haemophilia.
        Communicate appropriately with patients who have chronic and/or life-threatening disorders
         

F. Drugs and therapies

    Describe:
        common side-effects of cytotoxic chemotherapy
        the use of corticosteroids in autoimmune cytopenias
        indications for the use of intravenous immunoglobulin
        the role of specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors in chronic myeloid leukaemia
        the role of thalidomide and bortezomib in multiple myeloma
        the indications for and mechanism of action of commonly used anti-platelet agents
        the indications for warfarin and low molecular weight heparin, and the monitoring of warfarin dosage
        the role of monoclonal antibody therapies in non Hodgkins lymphoma
        the actions of granulocyte colony stimulating factor
        how the following drugs may induce thrombocytopenia (cytotoxic drugs, heparin, quinine/quinidine, antibiotics).
        in broad terms the goals of research into gene therapy for haemophilia A
        the role of desmopressin and cryoprecipitate in von Willebrand’s disease

G. Emergencies

    Recognise, and outline the initial management of:
        neutropenic sepsis
        pulmonary embolism
        massive haemorrhage:
        management of blood product transfusion and coagulopathy
        haemorrhage in haemophilia A, B and in von Willebrand’s disease

H. History taking

    Aetiology and prevention

    Take a history to elicit risk factors for:
        inherited causes of anaemia, bleeding or thrombosis and lymphoproliferative diseases.
        drug and chemical causes of haematological diseases.
        nutritional causes of anaemia.
        environmental factors predisposing to venous thromboembolism

I. Investigations

    Specific investigations in haematology
        Describe the staging investigations for non-Hodgkins lymphoma, Hodgkins lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
        Describe imaging investigations for deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism

    Laboratory haematology
        Interpretation of the Full Blood Count
            classify anaemia on the basis of the mean corpuscular volume and mean corpuscular haemoglobin measurement
            list the common causes of  neutrophilia
            list the common causes of eosinophilia
            list the common causes of neutropenia
            list the common causes of thrombocytosis
            understand the concept of the normal range and how it is generated
            identify common variability in specimen collection and transport that can affect laboratory results
        Interpretation of Coagulation Studies
            understand the principle of the prothrombin time
            understand the principle of the activated thromboplastin time
            know the effect of heparin and warfarin on clotting studies
            know the effect of haemophilia A and B and von Willebrand's disease (VWD) on clotting studies
            know the patterns of clotting studies (platelet count, prothrombin time, activated thromboplastin time, fibrinogen level, D-dimer/fibrin degradation products) found in patients with acquired coagulation defects

J. Physical examination

    Perform the following competently:
        detect anaemia or polycythaemia by examining the nail beds, palmar creases and mucous membranes
        differentiate bleeding and bruising due to platelet disorders from those due to coagulation factor disorders
        detect splenomegaly
        detect hepatomegaly
        detect lymphadenopathy

K. Physiology

    Cell physiology
        Erythrocyte
        Describe:
            normal red cell production and destruction
            regulation of red cell production and the role of erythropoietin
            structure of haemoglobin and the haemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve
            the major types and amounts of haemoglobin present in the embryo, foetus and adult
        Leucocyte
        Describe:
            the normal function of each of the leucocyte subtypes and the physiological control of leucocyte numbers  
            the role of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor in leucocyte production
        Platelet and Endothelial Cell
        Describe:
            the role of platelets in normal clotting and the physiological control of platelet numbers
            the role of thrombopoietin in platelet production  
            the role of the blood vessel and the endothelial cell in haemostasis
        Coagulation
        Describe:
            the cell-based model of coagulation and the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways of thrombin generation
            the function of naturally occurring inhibitors of blood coagulation
            the function of the fibrinolytic system

    Pathophysiology

    Understand the pathophysiology of:
        iron, vitamin B12 and folate deficiencies
        anaemia in chronic renal failure
        anaemia of chronic inflammation and the role of hepcidin
        venous thromboembolism (inherited and environmental predisposing factors to thrombosis)
        vitamin K deficiency and coagulopathy of liver failure

    Genetic and molecular pathophysiology of haematological diseases
        Describe the genetic basis of the following red cell disorders:
            thalassaemia A and thalassaemia B
            sickle cell anaemia
        Describe the genetic basis of the following coagulation disorders:
            haemophilia A
            haemophilia B
            von Willebrands disease
        Explain the role of the following genetic mutations in haematological malignancy:
            t(9;22), the Philadelphia Chromosome in chronic myeloid leukaemia and acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
            JAK2 V617F mutation in myeloproliferative diseases
            t(8;14) in Burkitts lymphoma
            t(14;18) in follicular lymphoma
            t(11;14) in mantle cell lymphoma

L. Transfusion medicine

        Recall the ABO and rhesus blood group systems
        Describe the principles of the following laboratory tests:
            direct antiglobulin test
            compatibility testing or cross-matching of blood
            infectious screening for blood products
        For the use of Blood Products be able to describe:
            NH&MRC guidelines for transfusion of red blood cells
            how to consent a patient for a blood transfusion
            composition of fresh frozen plasma and indications for its use
            composition of cryoprecipitate and indications for its use
            indications for the use of factor VIIa, factor VIII and factor IX
        Describe investigations and therapy for the following complications of blood transfusion:
            ABO incompatible blood transfusion
            febrile transfusion reaction
            immediate-type hypersensitivity reaction
