Discipline - Indigenous Health

A. Global objectives

    List key health indicators, including characteristics of mortality and morbidity, and population distributions specific to Indigenous Australians

    Recognise the strengths and limitations of available data used as key indicators of Indigenous Health

    State the approximate number of Australians who currently identify as Aboriginal/Indigenous, their distribution throughout Australia and the percentages of this population that live in urban, rural and remote areas

    Recognise that Indigenous Australia is diverse in its language, culture and demographics.

    Relate knowledge concerning the clinical and public health aspects of chronic diseases common in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities to diagnosis, management and prevention, particularly in:
        cardiovascular disease, including ischaemic and rheumatic heart disease
        psychiatric disorders; alcohol and other drugs of abuse
        renal disease
        diabetes
        respiratory disease
        dental conditions
        ophthalmic conditions including trachoma
        growth and nutrition, particularly in children
        women’s health
        infectious diseases
        cancer
        significant disease groups contributing to high rates of hospital admission

    Describe successful healthcare delivery initiatives in Indigenous health, their success and difficulties, and their application to other areas in healthcare.

    Utilise the available support from Aboriginal Health Workers (AHWs), and other Indigenous community workers, to help provide Aboriginal patients with the best possible care throughout their life.

    Understand the impact of racism (overt or subtle; individual or systemic) on interactions between patients and health professionals and give examples where these issues that may impair your ability to communicate sensitively and effectively.

    Identify key historical events in the Indigenous Health, including key developments in Indigenous health policies and strategies, and recognise their impact on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander current health status.

    Understand the influence of social determinants of health on Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders in Australia and similarly affected communities internationally.

    Identify key principles in developing collaborative and ethical relationships to work with Indigenous people in research.

    Gain some experience of the provision of healthcare to Indigenous people in a range of settings and locations.

    Have a sense of engagement in and responsibility for the improvement of Indigenous health in Australia, regardless of your eventual area of clinical practice.

    Participate in the development and education of health care providers to ensure that Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders can be confident of receiving competent, evidence based care.

    Understand the relevance and applicability of issues in the health of Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders to the health of Indigenous minorities in other developed countries (eg, New Zealand, Canada and the USA) and what Australia can learn from the experience of those countries in improving Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health.