Discipline - Neurology

A. Clinical presentations

B. Global objectives

C. Investigations

D. Paediatrics

E. Trauma
A. Clinical presentations

    Infections

    List the common organisms for the following and contrast the clinical presentations, CSF findings and treatment for each:
    (a) acute bacterial meningitis (list most common organisms for infants, children and adults)
    (b) acute viral meningitis
    (c) encephalitis

    Peripheral nervous system (PNS) disorders

    1. List the components of the motor unit and contrast the common lower motor neurone clinical  syndromes of neuropathy, neuromuscular junction disorders, and myopathy.

    2. For peripheral sensorimotor disorders, describe the following and discuss the localization and causes of each:
    (a) radiculopathy
    (b) mononeuropathy- including carpal tunnel syndrome
    (c) mononeuritis multiplex (multiple mono-neuropathy)
    (d) polyneuropathy – including diabetic neuropathy
    (e) paraesthesiae
    (f) fasciculation
    (g) typical clinical findings in root lesions at C-5 and L-5.
    (h) herniated nucleus pulposus (HNP)

    3. Discuss the symptoms, examination, and laboratory findings of carpal tunnel syndrome

    4. Describe an approach to the workup of a chronic polyneuropathy

    5. Describe the findings and pathology of acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy AIDP (Guillain- Barré syndrome)

    6. Describe the clinical features and differential diagnosis of motor neurone disease

    7. Describe the pathogenesis and usual clinical presentation of myasthenia gravis

    8. Describe the common clinical manifestations and pathophysiology of the following myopathies:
    (a) duchenne muscular dystrophy
    (b) myotonic dystrophy
    (c) polymyositis

    Disorders of vision

    1. Assess visual loss and localise the lesion causing the following:
    (a) monocular visual loss
    (b) enlarged blind spot
    (c) central scotoma
    (d) bitemporal field defect
    (e) homonymous hemianopia

    2. Assess diplopia
    (a) Describe the innervation and action of the extra-ocular muscles
    (b) Name the anatomic location and most common causes for each of the following syndromes:
    i. internuclear ophthalmoplegia
    ii. third cranial nerve palsy (pupil sparing versus non-pupil sparing)
    iii. sixth cranial nerve palsy
    iv. fluctuating or fatigable ocular muscle paresis sparing the pupil

    3. Recognise nystagmus and list its common causes
    (a) Differentiate peripheral from central forms of nystagmus

    4. Assess pupillary abnormalities
    (a) Trace the sympathetic and parasympathetic pathways that innervate the pupil
    (b) List the components of Horner’s syndrome and the sites where a causative lesion may occur
    (c) Describe the afferent pupillary defect (Marcus-Gunn pupil)

    Alcohol-related disorders

    1. Describe the clinical characteristics and emergency management of the following:
    (a) Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome
    (b) alcohol withdrawal seizure

    2. Describe the clinical features of   
    (a) alcohol related dementia
    (b) chronic alcohol related cerebellar degeneration

    Neurological Considerations in the Indigenous Population

    Understand the epidemiology of the complications of systemic disease in Australian indigenous
    populations and the impact of risk factors in this population on  
    (a) Diabetic Neuropathy
    (b) Stroke
    (c) Alcohol-related neurological disorders
    (d) Epilepsy

    Cerebrovascular diseases

    1. List the major risk factors for cerebrovascular disease and understand the degree to which they are modifiable

    2. Describe the pathophysiology and clinical features of:
    (a) asymptomatic carotid bruit
    (b) transient ischaemic attack (TIA)
    (c) ischaemic infarct (arteriogenic embolisation, cardiogenic embolisation, large-vessel thrombus)
    (d) lacunar infarct
    (e) haemorrhagic infarct
    (f) parenchymal haemorrhage
    (g) subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH)
    (h) amaurosis fugax (transient monocular blindness)

    3. Identify the major clinical features of infarction in the distribution of the: 
    (a) anterior cerebral artery
    (b) middle cerebral artery
    (c) lenticulostriate arteries
    (d) basilar artery

    4. Discuss the treatment options for acute stroke

    5. Understand how to minimise the incidence of stroke and recurrent stroke

    6. List the causes of intracranial haemorrhage
    (a) List the most common sites and clinical features for hypertensive parenchymal haemorrhage
    (b) Describe the typical clinical picture of a subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH)
    i. outline the diagnostic workup for a patient with a suspected SAH
    ii. discuss the immediate and early medical/surgical management of a patient with a SAH

    Epilepsy

    1. List the common risk factors for epilepsy:
    (a) complex febrile convulsions
    (b) meningitis
    (c) encephalitis
    (d) head injury
    (e) family history

    2. Seizure disorders
    (a) Outline the classification of common forms of seizures. Distinguish among the following: 
    i. generalised convulsive seizure
    ii. generalised non-convulsive seizure (absence)
    iii. partial complex seizure
    iv. partial simple seizure
    v. partial seizure with secondary generalisation
    vi. febrile convulsion
    (b) Describe what is meant by the term non-epileptic (pseudo) seizure
    (c) List the common causes of seizures as related to age group
    (d) Describe Todd’s post-ictal phenomenon
    (e) Describe the routine evaluation and management of a patient with new-onset seizures 
    (f) List the commonly used anticonvulsants and their indications and side effects
    (g) Understand the impact of seizure disorders on lifestyle 
    (h) Define status epilepticus and outline the initial evaluation and management of a patient in status epilepticus

    3. Define the term ‘syncope’ and list the common causes and the clinical features that help to distinguish syncope from seizure

    Disorders of motor function

    1. Differentiate between upper (UMN) and lower (LMN) motor neurone disorders by assessing muscle bulk, muscle strength, the pattern of weakness and reflex changes.
    (a) Contrast the common UMN clinical syndromes of hemiparesis, paraparesis, and quadriparesis by symptom distribution and discuss the pathophysiology.  
    i. differentiate deep tendon, superficial, and polysynaptic reflexes and how they differ in acute versus established lesions
    ii. define spasticity and rigidity
    (b) Differentiate between LMN facial weakness (eg. Bell’s palsy) and UMN facial weakness (eg. post cerebral stroke)
    (c)  Describe the diagnostic features of Motor Neurone Disease and understand the significance of mixed upper and lower motor neurone signs
    (d) Describe the clinical picture associated with myopathy and define the difference between inflammatory and structural myopathies.

    2. For disorders of cerebellar function, discuss the clinical findings and pathophysiology of lesions producing midline versus hemispheric cerebellar damage
    (a) Define ataxia and differentiate cerebellar from sensory ataxia
    (b) Define dysmetria
    (c) Define titubation
    (d) Describe a wide-based gait and discuss its anatomic localisation

    3. For movement disorders, define and differentiate the following:
    (a) Resting versus action tremor
    (b) Athetosis and chorea
    (c) Asterixis
    (d) Myoclonus
    (e) Tics
    (f) Rigidity 
    (g) Dystonia (including writers’ cramp and torticollis)
    (h) Discuss the clinical findings, laboratory findings, and treatment of the following:
    i. Parkinson’s Disease
    ii. essential tremor
    iii. tardive dyskinesia
    iv. Huntington’s Disease (not core)
    v. Wilson’s disease (not core)

    Multiple Sclerosis

    1. Describe the epidemiological and genetic characteristics of multiple sclerosis (MS)
    (a) female:male prevalence ratio
    (b) latitudinal gradient
    (c) monozygotic twin concordance rate of approximately 30%
    (d) major known susceptibility allele HLA (Chromosome 6)

    2. Discuss the clinical features of MS.

    3. Describe the typical MRI, CSF and evoked potential findings in MS.

    4. Describe the natural history of MS and treatments of proven benefit

    Dizziness and disorders of hearing

    1. Assess dizziness
    (a) define vertigo and contrast it with other types of dizziness
    (b) recognize the pattern of presentation of acoustic neuroma
    (c) recognise the pattern of benign paroxysmal vertigo

    2. Assess auditory responses
    (a) define tinnitus
    (b) discuss the difference between conductive and sensorineural hearing loss

    Disorders of higher cognitive function and communication

    1. Be aware of the social impact of disorders of cognitive function  

    2. Assess disorders of higher cognitive function
    (a) Define and differentiate acute confusional state (delirium) and dementia.  
    (b) List common examples of delirium and outline management principles.
    (c) Assess dementia
    i. list the common causes of dementia
    ii. list the differential diagnosis, including treatable, non-degenerative causes of cognitive
    dysfunction (eg. B12 deficiency, hypothyroidism)
    iii. distinguish dementia from pseudo-dementia secondary to depression
    (d) Understand the impact of dementia on patients and their families the options for future care of dementia sufferers

    3. Assess communication disorders
    (a) Define the following:
    i. aphasia
    ii. dysarthria
    (b) Define and localise Broca’s (non-fluent, motor) aphasia and Wernicke’s (fluent, receptive) aphasia

    Disorders of altered consciousness

    1. Define the following terms:
    (a) Consciousness
    (b) Coma
    (c) Brain death
    (d) Persistent vegetative state
    (e) Locked-in syndrome

    2. Assess the comatose patient
    (a) List the first three things you must do when confronted with a comatose patient (the ABCs)
    (b) Outline the steps in the initial evaluation and empiric treatment of the comatose patient
    (c) Discuss the techniques for eliciting and localising of the following findings on examination of a
    comatose patient:
    i. Motor
    (1) Decorticate versus decerebrate rigidity
    (2) Conjugate eye deviation and its relationship to the side of the lesion  
    ii. Eye movements
    (1) Intact versus absent oculo-cephalic response (doll’s eyes)
    iii. Pupillary response
    (1) Unilateral fixed dilated pupil
    iv. Respiratory
    (1) Cheyne-Stokes respiration

    3. Describe the diagnosis and management of increased intracranial pressure (ICP)
    (a) List the symptoms and signs of increased ICP
    (b) List the effects of uncal herniation on 
    i. level of consciousness
    ii. motor activity
    iii. extraocular movements
    iv. pupillary reactivity
    (c) List the indications for imaging prior to performing a lumbar puncture
    (d) Distinguish between communicating and non-communicating hydrocephalus

    Headaches and facial pain

    1. Contrast the clinical features that distinguish between benign versus potentially serious underlying causes of headache.

    2. Describe the clinical features of migraine headache with aura versus without aura

    3. Describe the clinical features of trigeminal neuralgia

    4. Describe the clinical features of the following causes of headaches:
    (a) subarachnoid haemorrhage
    (b) meningitis
    (c) increased ICP/mass
    (d) temporal arteritis
    (e) intracranial haemorrhage
    (f) hypertensive encephalopathy
    (g) sinusitis
    (h) temporomandibular joint dysfunction

    5. Discuss the urgent and non-urgent indications for the following diagnostic tests used to evaluate a headache patient
    (a) CT
    (b) Lumbar puncture – also list contraindications
    (c) Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
    (d) MRI

    6. Differentiate the CSF profiles of SAH and meningitis

    7. Discuss the treatment for common headache syndromes (migraine headache and tension headache), including symptomatic and prophylactic therapy

    Neck and back pain

    1. Differentiate clinically between myofascial pain, radiculopathy and spinal cord compression

    2. Discuss the significance of back pain in cancer patients

    Brain tumours

    1. Discuss the clinical presentation of a primary brain tumour in the following locations:
    (a) cerebellopontine angle
    (b) pituitary region
    (c) cerebral hemisphere
    (d) cerebellum

    2. Differentiate metastatic from primary brain tumour by
    (e) clinical features
    (f) imaging: CT or MRI

    3. List the most common metastatic tumours to the brain in adults

    Disorders of central sensation

    For central sensory disorders, describe and discuss the localisation of:
    (a) hemi-sensory disturbance
    (b) spinal sensory level
    (c) Brown-Sequard syndrome
    (d) dissociated sensory loss (as in syringomyelia)

    Spinal cord disorders

    1. Localize the lesion that gives the following findings on neurologic examination:
    (a) ipsilateral UMN findings and decreased position sense with contralateral decrease in pain and temperature sensation.
    (b) dissociated sensory loss, weakness and areflexia of the upper extremities
    (c) sensory level with paraparesis and bladder incontinence

    2. Describe the usual clinical presentation of vitamin B12 deficiency

B. Global objectives

    Describe the anatomic and physiologic basis of the neurologic examination

    Perform a competent general and neurological history

    Perform a competent neurological examination

    Synthesize the history and examination findings to localise the neurological lesion to either an anatomical region or physiological site

    Develop a differential diagnosis for common presenting problems

    Formulate a plan of investigation and management for common neurologic conditions

    Recognize common neurological emergencies

C. Investigations

    Describe the indications, techniques, normal and abnormal results, contraindications, and risks of the
    following diagnostic tests:
    (a) Lumbar puncture (LP)
    (b) Computed axial tomography (CT)
    (c) Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
    (d) Carotid ultrasound

D. Paediatrics

    Develop the skills required to undertake a basic developmental assessment in a child

    Describe the common Paediatric presentations of:
    (a) Epilepsy
    (b) Developmental Anomalies
    (c) Acquired fixed neurological disorders (cerebral palsy)
     

E. Trauma

    Head trauma

    1. Define each of the following sequelae of closed head trauma in terms of
    (a) temporal profile, symptoms and treatment:
    i. concussion
    ii. anterograde and retrograde amnesia
    iii. diffuse axonal injury  
    iv. subdural haematoma
    v. epidural haematoma

    2. Describe the evaluation and management of a patient with a closed head injury admitted for altered
    consciousness or focal findings.   

    3. Describe the individual and social cost of closed head injury