Discipline - Ophthalmology

A. Background knowledge

B. Clinical skills

C. Common and/or important conditions

D. Drugs and therapies

E. History taking

F. Management

G. Paediatrics

H. Procedural skills
A. Background knowledge

    Recall the anatomy and function of the bony orbit and surrounding sinuses, extraocular muscles, globe,
    uveal tract, lens, retina and visual pathway.

    Recall the sympathetic and parasympathetic neural contributions to the pupillary response.

    Describe the physiological mechanisms underlying:
    (a) accommodation
    (b) the maintenance of ocular surface integrity (lids, tear film), corneal clarity, lens clarity
    (c) the generation of intraocular pressure and the broad principles of aqueous circulation
    (d) retinal function and visual processing from retina to visual cortex

B. Clinical skills

    Perform a visual acuity (VA) exam and correctly record the VA for distance vision and for near vision

    Perform pinhole visual acuity exam and explain the significance of pinhole acuity

    State the range of normal vision and the minimum legal visual acuity and visual field requirements for
    driving

    Define the term ‘legal blindness’ as a measure of corrected visual acuity

    Perform visual field exam to confrontation, detect and describe any visual field abnormalities and
    identify the site(s) of possible pathology.

     Assess pupil function:
    (a) describe and identify the direct light reflex on pupil examination
    (b) describe and identify the consensual light reflex on pupil examination
    (c) identify a relative afferent pupil defect (RAPD), and describe its significance
    (d) describe and identify the accommodation reflex on pupil examination
    (e) identify causes of miosis and mydriasis on pupil examination

    Perform simple examination of ocular movements and determine possible findings of cranial nerve
    palsies and strabismus

    Recognise and describe abnormalities detected on examination of the external eye and periorbital area

C. Common and/or important conditions

    Acute causes of visual loss:
    (a) Describe the common causes of acute visual loss in our community including:
    i. central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO)
    ii. giant cell arteritis (GCA)
    iii. ‘wet’ age related macular degeneration
    iv. acute angle closure crisis
    v. central retinal vein occlusion
    vi. retinal detachment

    The red eye:
    (a) Describe the typical presentation and underlying pathophysiology of the following common causes
    of a red eye:
    i. bacterial conjunctivitis
    ii. adeno-viral conjunctivitis
    iii. blepharitis and posterior meibomitis
    iv. uveitis
    v. acute angle closure crisis
    vi. herpes simplex keratitis

    Eyelid and lacrimal pathology:
    (a) Describe the clinical features of:
    i. epiphora
    ii. nasolacrimal duct obstruction (NLDO) in adults and children
    iii. ptosis
    iv. ectropion and entropion
    v. blepharitis
    vi. meibomian cyst
    vii. common eyelid cancers

    Genetic eye conditions
    (a) Elicit a history for common genetic eye conditions and represent this on a family tree.
    (b) Describe the symptoms, signs and underlying pathophysiology of retinitis pigmentosa, aniridia,
    albinism, microphthalmia and coloboma
    (c) Describe genetics of common ophthalmic conditions including glaucoma, macular degeneration
    and cataract
    (d) Describe ocular features of systemic inherited conditions including neurofibromatosis, Marfan
    syndrome, Stickler syndrome
    (e) Describe systemic associations of inherited ocular conditions including aniridia, retinoblastoma,
    Leber’s congenital amaurosis and retinitis pigmentosa

    Trachoma in aboriginal communities
    (a) Recall the epidemiology, mode of transmission, and outcome if untreated, of trachoma in remote
    aboriginal communities
    (b) Describe the symptoms, treatment and measures to prevent trachoma

    Blindness:
    (a) Describe the pathophysiology an d epidemiology of the five most common causes of blindness in
    the Australian population:
    i. age-related macular degeneration
    ii. glaucoma
    iii. diabetic retinopathy
    iv. cataract
    v. myopia
    (b) Understand the epidemiology and socio-economic impact of cataract blindness and trachoma
    blindness in the developing world

D. Drugs and therapies

    Identify indications for use, contraindications, local and systemic side-effects of ophthalmic
    medications including:
    (a) topical and systemic glaucoma medications
    (b) topical steroid preparations of varying potencies
    (c) topical antibiotics (chloramphenicol, aminoglycosides, neosporin)
    (d) mydriatics
    (e) local anaesthetics
    (f) fluorescein

E. History taking

    Take an ocular history and a general medical history relevant to ocular health

    Elicit on history systemic illnesses that may impact on visual function, including hypertension, diabetes,
    stroke, giant cell arteritis (GCA), multiple sclerosis and HIV

    Elicit a family history for ocular diseases with strong hereditary predisposing factors including
    glaucoma, age related macular degeneration, cataract and strabismus

F. Management

    Vision threatening emergencies:
    (a) Identify vision threatening eye emergencies - trauma, infection, ocular and neurophthalmic causes –
    requiring urgent assessment by an ophthalmologist or registrar.
    (b) Initiate treatment/management for:
    i. eye trauma presentations including blunt ocular trauma, penetrating eye trauma, intraocular
    foreign bodies IOFB (metallic) chemical ocular injury, thermal injury, UV keratopathy, orbital
    blowout fracture and unexplained non-accidental injury
    ii. ocular infection presentations including endophthalmitis, corneal abscess, periorbital cellulitis,
    orbital cellulitis.
    iii. ocular causes of eye emergencies including acute angle closure crisis, retinal detachment, and
    corneal graft rejection.
    iv. neurophthalmic eye emergencies including giant cell arteritis, acute third nerve palsy and acute
    papilloedema.

    Red eyes:
    (a) Recognise the diagnostic features of, and initiate treatment/management for causes of unilateral
    and bilateral red eyes, including the following important conditions:
    i. conjunctivitis - bacterial, viral, Chlamydial, allergic
    ii. subconjunctival haemorrhage
    iii. uveitis
    iv. acute angle closure crisis
    v. dry eye
    vi. blepharitis
    vii. keratitis - bacterial, herpes simplex, fungal
    viii. episcleritis and scleritis
    ix. chalazion
    x. hordeolum
    xi. herpes zoster ophthalmicus.

G. Paediatrics

    Childhood visual problems:
    (a) Describe the clinical presentation and explain the underlying pathophysiology of the differential
    diagnosis of Leukocoria [including cataract, retinoblastoma and PHPV (persistent hyperplastic
    primary vitreous)].
    (b) Describe the clinical presentation and explain the underlying pathophysiology of:
    i. esotropia (infantile and accommodative) and exotropia
    ii. congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction
    iii. ophthalmia neonatorum
    iv. cortical visual impairment
    v. retinopathy of prematurity
    vi. congenital cataracts and
    vii. congenital glaucoma.
    (c) Define amblyopia so as to demonstrate an understanding of developmental factors in visual
    function.
    (d) Describe the clinical features of an ocular injury in a child that would make you suspect that the
    injury was non-accidental.

H. Procedural skills

    Describe and demonstrate the essential standard precautions to prevent infection or cross infection
    during an ocular examination, including hand hygiene, sterilisation of equipment, protective eye wear
    and the use of gloves

    Explain to patients the correct technique for instilling eye drops and how to minimise systemic
    absorption

    Perform basic ocular emergency techniques including eversion of upper eye lids, slit lamp examination,
    application of local anaesthetic, application of fluorescein dye, ocular washout, removal of a
    corneal/conjunctival foreign body, double padding an eye, place and secure eye shield, and remove
    eyelashes

    Use the direct ophthalmoscope to examine the fundus through a dilated pupil to:
    (a) locate the optic nerve and macula
    (b) identify and describe abnormalities of the optic nerve and retina, including vascular changes
    associated with hypertension; macular degeneration signs; glaucomatous optic neuropathy
    changes; and diabetic retinopathy signs

    Use both direct ophthalmoscopy and slit lamp to identify:
    (a) normal and abnormal red reflex
    (b) ocular abrasion under cobalt blue light
    (c) corneal abscess
    (d) hyphaema and hypopyon
    (e) normal versus shallow anterior chamber
    (f) retinal haemorrhages
    (g) papilloedema

    Test for corneal sensation (corneal reflex) with cotton wisp or tissue

    Perform digital tonometry through the patient’s closed upper eyelid to differentiate an eye with normal
    intraocular pressure (IOP) from the hard eye caused by very high IOP