Discipline - Paediatrics

A. Clinical skills

B. Communication

C. Investigations

D. Public Health

E. Personal and Professional Development (PPD)

F. Development

G. Feeding, growth and nutrition

H. Common and/or important conditions

I. Physiological & Psychological Changes
A. Clinical skills

    Apply the core clinical skills needed to assess a child and adolescent, with particular awareness of age related changes:
        Paediatric history taking in the context of the child and adolescent and their family
        Paediatric examination of development, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular and respiratory systems, with particular reference to areas of these examinations unique to Paediatrics. Ability to perform clinical examination for common Paediatric surgical and orthopaedic problems.
        Basic clinical tasks: be able to correctly complete basic orders, such as: chart intravenous fluids; write-up medications; and complete asthma action plans.

B. Communication

    Demonstrate the skills required to communicate effectively with the child and adolescent and their carers to:
        gain the cooperation and trust of the child and adolescent
        elicit an accurate and comprehensive history
        elicit a targeted history within the context of a clinical presentation
        explain differential diagnoses, investigations and procedures, and management to the carers, and child and adolescent as appropriate.

C. Investigations

    Demonstrate knowledge of the diagnostic investigations and procedures relevant to the child and adolescent. 

D. Public Health

    Population Medicine

    Apply understanding of the health of the child and adolescent in the community including:
        aspects of primary, secondary and tertiary prevention
        health promotion
        child advocacy and the influence of broader factors on the health of the child and adolescent, e.g. cultural, environmental and political factors
        services for the child and adolescent in urban and rural communities
        importance of multidisciplinary communication between services and the family

    Evidence Based Medicine

    Demonstrate development in understanding of evidence based medicine principles underlying all components of the course, in particular:
        application of EBM to the individual patient and their family
        critical appraisal of available evidence in paediatrics
        interpretation of synthesised evidence: systematic reviews, meta-analyses and evidence based guidelines.

E. Personal and Professional Development (PPD)

    Apply understanding of the Personal & Professional Development Theme objectives underlying all components of the course, with particular emphasis on:
        ethical and medico-legal issues in relation to illness and health care of children and adolescents
        personal and professional challenges of working in the paediatric context
        responsible clinical practice and commitment to ongoing improvement.

F. Development

    Apply and interpret knowledge and understanding of child and adolescent development including:
        the wide range of developmental progress, both physiological and psychological
        how these developmental changes affect clinical manifestations of disease and management of clinical conditions.
        developmental history and examination
        indications for follow up and referral

G. Feeding, growth and nutrition

    Apply knowledge of feeding, growth and nutrition including the ability to plot and interpret patterns of growth and demonstrate competent use of growth charts.

H. Common and/or important conditions

    Apply knowledge and understanding of the common and important medical and surgical conditions in relation to different age groups (neonate, infant, toddler, preschool and school age child, and adolescent) and the diagnosis and management of these conditions.

I. Physiological & Psychological Changes

        Apply an understanding of the physiological and psychological changes during childhood and adolescence, and how these affect clinical manisfestations of disease and management of clinical conditions.
