Discipline - Psychiatry

 A. GENERAL LEARNING OBJECTIVES

    Discuss the aetiology (biological, psychological and socio-cultural), epidemiology and prognosis of key disorders in each of the diagnostic categories listed above.
    Outline the clinical manifestations and natural history of these key disorders and utilise this knowledge to make diagnoses on the basis of history and examination.
    Discuss underlying mechanisms of action (if known) of biological and psychosocial treatments for key disorders.
    Choose and interpret standard investigations used when investigating or monitoring psychiatric disorders and their treatment.
    Formulate a management plan for key disorders in each of the diagnostic categories encompassing relevant biological treatments (medication and electroconvulsive therapy), psychological treatments (eg behavioural therapy, cognitive behavioural therapy, supportive therapy, family therapy) and social interventions.
    Describe and manage possible side effects and interactions of these treatments.
    Discuss the role of the multidisciplinary team in the care of people with a mental illness and integrate this into the care of a patient.



 
Student Resources (sort by rating | date )

B. SPECIFIC LEARNING OBJECTIVES

    Explain how human development alters the presentation and treatment of mental disorders with particular regard to Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Old Age Psychiatry.
    Discuss issues surrounding the prescription of psychotropic medication to younger and older people.
    Discuss the effect of developmental disability upon the presentation of psychiatric disorder and its effect on management.
    Discuss the role of the family in development, the way family interaction may affect mental health and well being, and develop skills in describing and assessing family function.
    Explain how psychological factors interact with and affect the aetiology, presentation, course and outcome of a patient’s medical illness and its treatment.
    Discuss Talcott Parson’s concepts of the “sick role” and “abnormal illness behaviour” and apply these theoretical constructs to the assessment and management of patients.
    Decide under what circumstances it might be appropriate to refer a patient to a psychiatrist or, in a general hospital setting, to the Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry Service and formulate an appropriate and focused question for the referral.
    Demonstrate the ability to assess a patient after self-poisoning or other deliberate self-harm and formulate an immediate management plan.
    Identify clinical situations where detention under the Mental Health Act (MHA) is necessary and complete Form 1 of the MHA.
    Apply an understanding of the ethical and legal issues of consent, confidentiality and abuse/neglect to young, elderly and developmentally disabled people presenting with mental health problems.
    Discuss how the stigmatisation of people with mental health disorders by society and other treating health professionals impacts upon their care
    Describe how aboriginality and cultural diversity affect the presentation of mental illness and the provision of care.

Student Resources (sort by rating | date )

C. CLINICAL SKILLS

    Demonstrate an ability to engage and communicate with people with a mental illness over the life span.
    Elicit accurately and empathically a full psychiatric history including a developmental history, a mental state examination and cognitive assessment.
    Elicit a full substance use history.
    Obtain and describe basic information about family history and function.
    Assess a patient’s risk to themselves or others especially in the Emergency Department setting.
    Synthesise and present a coherent formulation of a patient’s psychiatric disorder.
    Formulate a provisional and differential diagnosis for a patient’s psychiatric presentation and concurrent general medical problems where relevant.
    Justify the range of investigations required for a patient with a psychiatric illness/substance misuse problem.
    Develop an initial management plan for the treatment of a psychiatric disorder including biological, psychological and socio-cultural interventions.
    Describe the risks and benefits of a treatment plan to a patient with a mental illness.
    Provide basic cognitive behavioural therapy.
