Discipline - Rheumatology

A. Acute conditions

B. Background knowledge

C. Chronic conditions

D. Clinical diagnosis

E. Drugs and therapies

F. Fractures and dislocations

G. History taking

H. Investigations

I. Ligament injuries

J. Orthopaedic surgery

K. Paediatrics

L. Physical examination

M. Procedural skills
A. Acute conditions

    Recognise and outline the management of the following common acute musculoskeletal presentations:
        septic arthritis
        trauma, including the concept of trauma scores
        back pain with neurological involvement
        giant cell arteritis
        fracture with vascular or neurological compromise
        soft tissue infection

B. Background knowledge

    Describe the anatomy of the joints, muscles and ligaments of the limbs and vertebral column.

    Describe the pathophysiology of:
        rheumatoid arthritis
        osteoarthritis
        osteoporosis
        fracture healing
        dupytren's contracture
        epiphyseal injury
        nerve injury

C. Chronic conditions

    Understand the importance of the following in managing chronic illness:
        patient education
        communication with the patient
        modification of lifestyle
        psychological effects of chronic illness
        effect on work and workers compensation

    Understand the role played by the following Allied Health Professionals in managing chronic musculoskeletal illness:
        Physiotherapists
        Occupational Therapists
        Social Workers

D. Clinical diagnosis

    Describe the clinical features, and outline the approach to diagnosis and management/treatment of:
        osteoarthritis
        rheumatoid arthritis
        crystal induced arthritis/gout and pseudogout
        osteomyelitis
        septic arthritis
        compartment syndromes
        common primary or secondary neoplasms of bone
        seronegative spondarthritidies/ankylosing spondylitis
        psoriatic arthritis
        reactive arthritis
        systemic lupus erythematosus
        polymyositis
        polymyalgia rheumatica
        giant cell arteritis
        sclerodoma
        Sjogren’s syndrome
        back pain
        scoliosis
        osteoporosis
        fibromyalgia
        rotator cuff tendonopathy in the shoulder
        lateral epicondylitis of the elbow
        plantar fasciitis
        achilles tendonopathy
        Dupytren’s disease
        upper limb nerve compression syndromes
        tumours, such as ganglia

E. Drugs and therapies

    Describe the indications for use, modes of action, common adverse effects and common drug interactions of:
        Paracetamol and other analgesics
        Non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs
        Antibiotics
        Corticosteroids
        Methotrexate
        Salazopyrin
        Allopurinol

    Describe the principles for the use of biological response modifiers in musculoskeletal disease

F. Fractures and dislocations

    Describe the clinical, radiological and pathophysiological features for the following categories of fracture:
        closed
        open or compound, including an outline of the grading system for compound fractures and its significance for management
        comminuted
        intraarticular
        pathological
        greenstick

    Describe fracture management principles as they relate to:
        management priorities
        indications for non-surgical reduction
        indications for open reduction and internal fixation of a fracture
        immobilisation of fractures
        complications of cast immobilisation of acute extremity injuries (cast care)
        physical rehabilitation of a limb that has been immobilised for fracture healing

    Describe the clinical features, complications and management of the following common fractures:
        colles and Smiths fracture
        fractured neck of femur
        mid-humeral and supracondylar humeral fractures
        clavicle
        scaphoid fracture
        bennett’s fracture
        finger fractures
        fractured pelvis
        fracture of the cervical spine
        fractured patella
        femoral and tibial shafts
        ankle fracture

    Describe the pathophysiology, clinical features, prevention and management of the following fracture complications:
        neurovascular complications
        infection
        compartment syndromes
        volkmann’s ischaemic contracture
        malunion, non-union
        secondary osteoarthriitis
        complications of cast immobilisation of acute extremity fractures

    Describe the causes, clinical features, neurological and vascular complications, and management of the following dislocations:
        shoulder - anterior and posterior
        sternoclavicular joint
        pulled elbows in children
        wrist and digits
        hip
        patella
        ankle

G. History taking

    Take an accurate and clinically relevant history and integrate this with the findings from a physical examination in order to construct a differential diagnosis and initiate investigation for a patient presenting with one or a combination of the following:
        joint pain or swelling
        back and neck pain
        muscle pain and stiffness, either localized or generalised
        deformity or mass
        limitation of range of joint movement
        altered sensation
        diffuse systemic symptoms involving multiple systems consistent with an autoimmune disorder or vasculitis
        musculoskeletal injury
        pain or stiffness involving tendons or ligaments
        sepsis

    Assess the impact of the musculoskeletal problem on the patient’s quality of life and ability to function.

    Elicit a history of the risk factors for major causes of arthritis, back pain, scoliosis, crystal arthritis, slipped upper femoral epiphysis and congential dislocation of the hip.

    Assess the impact of occupation on the musculoskeletal system

H. Investigations

    Recognise abnormalities in the complete blood count, liver function tests, urea and electrolyes, urate, C-reactive protein and ESR that are associated with an acute arthritis, including a septic arthritis and common autoimmune disorders eg. systemic lupus erythematosus.

    Interpret the following common autoantibody tests and understand their clinical significance:
        rheumatoid factor
        anti-citrillunated peptide/protein antibodies
        anti-nuclear antibodies
        antibodies to double stranded dsDNA

    Identify on X-ray the following fractures:
        colles and Smiths fracture
        fractured neck of femur
        mid-humeral and supracondylar humeral fractures
        clavicle
        scaphoid fracture
        bennett’s fracture
        finger fractures
        fractured pelvis
        fracture of the cervical spine
        fractured patella
        femoral and tibial shafts
        ankle fracture

    Identify on X-ray the following dislocations:
        shoulder - anterior and posterior
        sternoclavicular joint
        wrist and digits
        hip
        patella
        ankle

    Differentiate between osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis on X-ray

    Understand the rationale for CT or MRI scan as an appropriate investigation in the musculoskeletal system

    Describe the information obtained from the synovial fluid analysis that assists in the diagnosis of:
        septic arthritis
        crystal induced arthritis/gout, pseudogout
        inflammatory versus non-inflammatory arthritis

I. Ligament injuries

    Describe the clinical and pathophysiological differences between a strain, sprain and rupture

    Outline the indications for surgical repair of a ligament

    Describe and understand the clinical features, acute management, including RICE (rest, ice, compression, elevation), and rehabilitation of injuries of the cruciate ligaments and the ankle collateral ligaments.

J. Orthopaedic surgery

    Understand the indications for and the general principles of arthroscopy

    Recognise the indications, associated risks, complications of arthroplasty

    Outline the principles of osteotomy and arthrodesis

    Describe the principles of post-operative rehabilitation

K. Paediatrics

    Describe and understand the clinical features of the following congenital musculoskeletal disorders:
        radial and ulnar club hand
        syndactyly and polydactyly
        congenital subluxation and dislocation of the hip
        club foot
        perthes disease
        slipped upper femoral epiphysis
        torticollis

L. Physical examination

    Perform a musculoskeletal screening examination

    Correctly examine the spine, shoulders, elbows, hands, hips, knees and feet

    Detect swelling, deformities and determine range of movement

    Detect muscle weakness

    Assess for ligamentous laxity

    Detect abnormalities associated with soft tissue rheumatic disorders including shoulder rotator cuff disorders, lateral epicondylitis, plantar fasciitis and Achilles tendonopathy

    Detect signs of C5, C6, L5 and S1 nerve root compression and other upper limb nerve compression syndromes including brachial plexus lesions.

    Detect the signs of cauda equina, median, ulnar, radial, sciatic and common peroneal nerve lesions.

    Detect common gait abnormalities, both mechanical and neurological, and identify their probable causes

M. Procedural skills

    Apply a plaster to immobilize a fracture

    Understand the principles and describe how to perform a closed reduction of Colles and Smith fractures (if possible, observe and perform under supervision)

    Understand the principles and describe how to reduce dislocated shoulders and hips (if possible, observe and perform under supervision)