Discipline - Surgery

A. Overarching principles

B. Abdominal swellings and masses

C. Central abdominal pain

D. Lower abdominal pain and right iliac fossa pain

E. Acute epigastric pain, dyspepsia and jaundice

F. Rectal bleeding and constipation

G. Painful leg and leg ulceration

H. Surgical oncology and lumps

I. Urology

J. Neurosurgery

K. Cardiothoracic surgery

L. Transplant surgery
A. Overarching principles

    Demonstrate compassionate behaviours in all aspects of clinical conduct informed by evidence based decision making

    Explain clinical problems to patients using language they can understand

    Explain the principles of screening as they apply to surgical disease with specific regard to:
        breast cancer
        bowel cancer
        prostate cancer

    Demonstrate an understanding of the key elements of communication in surgery with specific regard to:
        consent and shared decision making
        breaking bad news
        grief and bereavement
        communication with nursing staff and medical colleagues

    Generate a provisional diagnosis for common surgical presentations

    Assess a patient’s possible need for and clinical readiness for surgery

    Describe the context, mechanism, indications and precautions of the use of the following in preparing a patient for surgery:
        bowel prep
        compressive stockings
        anticoagulants and deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis
        prophylactic antibiotics

    Manage postoperative patients including the recognition of early and late post operative complications such as:
        deep venous thrombosis
        hypovolaemia
        bleeding
        chest infection and lung collapse
        wound infection
        pelvic abscess
        wound dehiscence

    Define the terms aseptic, sterile, disinfection, infected, contaminated and antibacterial

    State the modes of transmission and prevention for the various blood borne infections relevant to surgery including hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV

    Demonstrate an understanding of the context, mechanism, method and precautions of the use of the following:
        diathermy
        suction
        drains
        urinary Catheters
        central and peripheral intravenous access
        nasogastric tube

    Describe the management (including investigation and treatment) of bleeding disorders.

    Describe the indications, contraindications, side effects and precautions in the use of blood products including blood, packed cells and clotting factors

B. Abdominal swellings and masses

    Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with abdominal swelling or mass in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with an abdominal swelling or mass with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of abdominal swellings, including causes that result from pathological abnormalities of the following anatomical parts:
        anterior abdominal wall
        omentum
        the liver
        spleen
        stomach
        pancreas
        aorta and Iliac arteries
        lymph nodes
        small and large intestine
        kidney
        pelvic organs in females
        pelvic organs in males

C. Central abdominal pain

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of central abdominal pain, including:
        small bowel obstruction (including strangulation)
        small bowel infarction/ischaemia
        Crohn’s disease
        aortic aneurysm

    Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with central abdominal pain in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with central abdominal pain with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.

D. Lower abdominal pain and right iliac fossa pain

    Lower Abdominal Pain

    Take a history, perform a physical examination (including a rectal examination) and investigate a patient with lower abdominal pain in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with lower abdominal pain with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of lower abdominal pain including:
        large bowel obstruction (especially resulting from colonic carcinoma and sigmoid volvulus)
        acute diverticular disease
        colonic perforation
        acute urinary retention
        pelvic inflammatory disease
        acute appendicitis
        torsion of the ovary
        complicated ovarian cyst
        iliac aneurysm

    Right Iliac Fossa Pain

    Take a history, perform a physical examination (including a rectal examination) and investigate a patient with right iliac fossa pain in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with right iliac fossa pain with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of right iliac fossa pain including:
        Acute appendicitis
        Crohn’s disease
        Ovarian cysts
        Ectopic pregnancy
        Ovarian torsion
        Ureteric calculus
        Mesenteric adenitis

E. Acute epigastric pain, dyspepsia and jaundice

    Acute Epigastric Pain

    Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with acute epigastric pain in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with acute epigastric pain with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of acute epigastric pain including:
        cholelithiasis, cholecystitis and cholangitis
        peptic ulcer disease
        pancreatitis
        reflux oesophagitis
        ruptured or dissecting abdominal aneurysm

    Dyspepsia

    Be able to take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with dyspepsia in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with dyspepsia with regard to the anatomical structures and physiological processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of dyspepsia including:
        reflux oesophagitis
        peptic ulcer disease
        gastritis and duodenitis
        cholelithiasis

    Jaundice

    Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with jaundice in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with jaundice with regard to the physiology of bilirubin metabolism and the anatomy of the liver and biliary tree.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of jaundice:
        pre hepatic
        hepatic causes - conjugated vs unconjugated
        post hepatic

F. Rectal bleeding and constipation

    Rectal bleeding with constipation (without vomiting)
        Take a history, perform a physical examination (including a rectal examination) and investigate a patient with rectal bleeding in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.
        Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with rectal bleeding with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.
        Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of rectal bleeding including:
            haemorrhoids
            anal fissures
            colorectal carcinoma
            benign polyps of the large intestine
            ulcerative Colitis
            ischaemic colitis
            infective colitis
            diverticular disease
        Take a history, perform a physical examination (including a rectal examination) and investigate a patient with constipation in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.
        Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with constipation with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.
        Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of constipation.

    Constipation with vomiting

    Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with bowel obstruction in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with apparent bowel obstruction with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.

    Differentiate between low bowel obstruction and high bowel obstruction.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of scrotal mass including:
        Ileus
        Adhesions
        Intussusception
        Carcinoma of the bowel
        Hirschsprung’s disease
        Sigmoid volvulus
        Abdominal wall hernias with bowel entrapment

G. Painful leg and leg ulceration

    Painful leg

    Be able to take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with painful in order to be able to identify the most likely causes including:
        cellulitis
        acute and chronic arterial occlusive disease
        deep Venous Thrombosis

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of painful leg including:
        cellulitis
        arterial claudication
        deep venous thromobosis.

    Describe the anatomy of the vessels of the leg with specific regard to diagnosis, investigation (invasive and non invasive) as well as management of:
        arterial occlusive disease and its sequelae
        venous insufficiency, venous thrombosis and sequelae

    Leg ulceration

    Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with leg ulcers in order to be able to identify the most likely cause.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main diseases which result in leg ulcers including:
        arterial insufficiency
        venous incompetence
        infective ulcers
        diabetic ulcers
        neuropathic ulcers
        neoplastic eg melanoma, squamous carcinoma, basal carcinoma
        traumatic ulcers

H. Surgical oncology and lumps

    Skin Lesions

    Anatomy
    Review the anatomy of the skin layers:
        Epidermus
        Dermus
        Subcutaneous fat

    Review the anatomy of the skin structures:
        Hair follicles
        Sebaceous glands
        Nails and nail bed.

    Pathophysiology
        Describe the common benign nevi and pigmented lesions.
        Describe the gross morphologic and pathologic differences between benign and malignant naevi and discuss the approach to diagnosis.
        List predisposing factors for melanoma.
        Describe the major prognostic variables of melanoma; include a discussion of Clark’s level and Breslow depth.
        Identify possible areas of metastasis of melanoma and outline steps to determine the extent of disease.
        Outline local, regional, and systemic therapy for melanoma.
        Distinguish gross pathologic differences between basal and squamous cell carcinomas and list predisposing causes and likely areas of clinical sites.
        Distinguish the natural history, the curability, and the propensity to metastasize of basal and squamous cell carcinomas.
        Describe medical and surgical therapies available for both types of skin cancer.

    Subcutaneous lumps

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of a subcutaneous lump including:
        Lipoma
        Sebaceous cyst
        Neuroma
        Ganglion
        Subcutaneous abscess

    Sarcoma
        Describe the clinical features of a sarcoma presenting in the head or neck, the trunk and the extremity.
        Describe the techniques to diagnose and adequately stage a soft tissue tumor of the extremity.
        Outline medical, surgical, and radiotherapy modalities, which can be applied to soft tissue tumors.

    Lump in the groin

    Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with a lump in the groin in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with a lump in the groin with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of a lump in the groin including:
        Inguinal and femoral hernia
        lymphadenopathy - generalized
        lymphadenopathy - localised
        lipoma
        psoas abscess
        femoral artery aneurysm
        saphena varix

    Breast lump

    Be able to take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with breast lump in order to be able to arrive at a differential diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a male and a female patient with breast lump with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of breast lump and be able to explain the differences between:
        carcinoma of the breast
        fat necrosis
        fibroadenoma
        cysts

    Neck lump

    Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with lump in the neck in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with lump in the neck with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of neck lump including:
        nodular goitre
        thyroid carcinoma
        parotid tumours
        carotid body tumours
        thyroglossal duct cysts
        branchial cysts
        lymphadenopathy - generalized
        lymphadenopathy - regional

I. Urology

    Haematuria

    Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with haematuria in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with haematuria with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of haematuria including:
        carcinoma of the bladder
        renal carcinoma
        urolithiasis
        urinary tract infections
        medical diseases of the kidney
        renal and bladder trauma
        benign prostatic hypertrophy

    Voiding Disorder

    Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with voiding disorder in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with voiding disorder with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of obstructive voiding disorders including:
        benign prostatic hyperplasia
        prostate cancer
        urethral stricture

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of irritative voiding disorders including:
        urinary tract infection
        bladder cancer
        neurological abnormalities such as stroke, Parkinson’s disease and paraplegia
        bladder stones

    Acute scrotal pain

    Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with scrotal pain in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with acute scrotal pain with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of acute scrotal pain including:
        torsion
        acute epididymitis
        testicular and scrotal trauma

    Scrotal mass

    Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with scrotal mass in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis.

    Generate a list of potential diagnoses in a patient with scrotal mass with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.

    Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of scrotal mass including:
        hydrocele
        haematocele
        testicular cancer
            germ cell tumours
            seminoma (seminoma (s) is sensitive to radiotherapy)
            non seminomatous
            non germ cell tumours
            leydig cell tumours
        sliding inguinal hernia

J. Neurosurgery

    Tumours of the brain and spine
        Describe the patterns of presentation of cerebral tumours including:
            Raised intracranial pressure
            Seizures
            Neurological deficit
        Describe the epidemiology, radiology, management and prognosis with particular reference to:
            Glioblastoma multiforme
            Low grade glioma and oligodendroglioma
            Meningioma
            Cerebral metastasis
        Describe the role of surgery as well as adjuvant such as radiotherapy and chemotherapy treatment in the management of brain tumours
        List the most common paedaitric brain tumours and describe the differences in presentation, and location of paediatric brain tumours compared to adults:
            Pilocytic astrocytoma
            Medulloblastoma
            Ependymoma
        Describe the clinical presentation including endocrinological syndromes and ophthalmolgical disorders associated with pituitary adenomas and describe the role of medical and surgical management,
        List the most common tumours of the spine along with their clinical presentation, imaging characteristics and management including:
            Schwannoma
            Neurofibroma
            Ependymoma
            Intrinsic glioma
            Spinal meningioma
        Describe the presentation of spinal cord compression and the management options including the role of radiotherapy and surgery in the management of metastatic disease of the spine

    Hydrocephalus
        Describe CSF circulation anatomy and physiology
        Describe the aetiological, clinical and radiological features of hydrocephalus including:
            Neonatal and infantile hydrocephalus
            Acute and chronic hydrocephalus
            Normal pressure hydocephalus
            Pseudotumor cerebri
        Describe the management of hydrocephalus including:
            Medical management
            CSF shunts
            Endoscopic third ventriculostomy

    Spine
        Describe the pathophysiology and clinical features of degenerative spinal disease including:
            Cervical and Lumbar disc herniations
            Cervical and Lumbar spinal canal stenosis
            Spondylolisthesis
        Describe the features of common clinical presentations of cervical and lumbar spinal disease and describe the management of the following:
            Cervical myleopathy
            Cervical radiculopathy: C5, C6 and C7
            Neurogenic claudication
            Lumbar radiculopathy: L3, L4, L5 and S1
        Describe the basic surgical procedures for common spinal conditions including:
            Cervical and lumbar laminectomy
            Lumbar microdiscectomy
            Cervical and lumbar spinal fusion
        Describe the acute management of spinal trauma including spinal cord injury.
        Describe the clinical features and management of infective spinal conditions including discitis, vertebral osteomyelitis and epidural abcess formation.

    Peripheral nerve
        Describe the clinical features and management of common peripheral entrapment syndromes including:
            Carpal tunnel syndrome: median nerve
            Ulnar neuropathy
            Radial nerve lesions
            Common peroneal nerve lesions
        Be able to differentiate these peripheral entrapment syndromes from other conditions such as radiculopathy

    Other
        Describe the clinical features and management of the following conditions:
            Chiari I malformation
            Chiari II malformation
            Meningocele
            Myelomeningocele
            Spinal lipoma
            Spinal cord tethering

    Intracranial haemorrhage
        Describe the aetiology, clinical features, radiological features and management of the each of the following forms of intracranial haemorrhage:
            Intracerebral haemorrhage
            Subdural haemorhage: chronic, subacute and acute
            Extradural haemorrhage
        Describe the aetiology, clinical features, radiological features, management and prognosis of subarachnoid haemorrhage, including the prevention and management of vasospasm
        Describe the risk factors, pathophysiology and management of each of the following lesions:
            Cerebral aneurysm
            Arteriovenous malformation
            Cavernoma

    Traumatic brain injury
        Describe the features, implications and be able to demonstrate clinical assessment of the Glasgow Coma Score.
        Describe the management of acute head injury including its management in the context of multisystem injuries.
        Describe the clinical and radiological features of common patterns of traumatic brain injury including:
            Cerebral oedema
            Diffuse axonal injury
            Cerebral contusions including contra coup injuries
            Subdural and extradural haematoma
            Traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage
            Skull fractures including base of skull fractures
        Describe the principles of the intensive care management of raised intracranial pressure and be able to list the various therapeutic options used in this management.

K. Cardiothoracic surgery

    Chest pain
        Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with chest pain in order to arrive at a diagnosis.
        Generate a list of potential diagnosis in a patient with chest pain with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction
        Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of chest pain.
            Coronary artery disease
            Pulmonary emolus
            Pneumothorax
            Aortic aneurysm/dissection

    Shortness of breath
        Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with shortness of breath in order to arrive at a diagnosis.
        Generate a list of potential diagnosis in a patient with shortness of breath with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease of dysfunction.
        Recall the definition, qetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the causes of shortness of breath.
            Chronic lung disease
            Pneumothorax
            Pneumonia
            Valvular disease
            Cardiac failure

    Cough
        Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with cough in order to arrive at a diagnosis.
        Generate a list of potential diagnosis in a patient with shortness of breath with regard to the anatomical structures and processes which may result in disease or dysfunction.
        Recall the definition, aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and smptoms, management and prgnosis of the main causes of cough.
            Tumours of the bronchus and lung
            Foreign bodies of the airways
            Chronic lung disease

    Haemoptysis
        Take a history, perform a physical examination and investigate a patient with haemotysis in order to be able to arrive at a diagnosis
        Generate a list of potential diagnosis in a patient with haemoptosis with regard the anatomical structures and processes which may in disease of dysfunction.
        Recall the definition aetiology, epidemiology, pathology, signs and symptoms, management and prognosis of the main causes of haemoptysis:
            Tumours of the bronchus and lung
            Tuberculosis
            Lung abscess
            Lung infarction
            Cardiac failure

L. Transplant surgery

    Outline the basic pharmacology and potential complications of immunosuppressive agents in current clinical use

    Understand the moral, ethical and legal issues and steps involved in determining brain death; deceased donor and living donor organ donation.

    Describe the basic assessment of medical, laboratory and anatomic characteristics of a potential organ donor (live or deceased)

    Outline the procedure to safely recover abdominal organs from donors

    Outline the indications for kidney, pancreas and liver transplantations and the basic principles of recipient selection and transplant procedures